[SQUEAKING]
[RUSTLING]
[CLICKING]
LAWRENCE GUTH: Today
we're going to talk
about the
Szemeredi-Trotter theorem.
I mentioned the
Szemeredi-Trotter theorem
on the first day,
and you could think
of as a fundamental theorem
in projection theory.
It's one of the rare theorems
that is completely sharp.
It's just the right answer
for a natural question
in projection theory.
Yeah.
So we're so we're going
to talk about it and see--
yeah, so there's some
interesting techniques
involved in it.
Yeah.
There, so that's what we'll do.
All right.
So let me remind
you what it says.
So what we talked
about on the first day,
I called it the
Szemeredi-Trotter projection
theorem.
So the setup was that you
have a finite set in the plane
and you have a
set of directions.
And then S equals S of XD
is the largest projection
of X in any of these directions.
So that's the if.
And then the conclusion is
that the number of directions
is bounded by S
squared over X plus 1,
which we saw in the first.
OK.
So this theorem is really
a corollary of the theorem
that they proved that is more
general that I'll state now.
And the more general
theorem is a theorem
about how points and lines
intersect in the plane.
OK.
So let's say X is a set
of points in the plane
and L is a set of
lines in the plane.
The number of incidences between
X and L is the number of pairs.
So take a point and a line.
So that the point
is in the line.
Let me make a picture.
So suppose those are our lines
and these are our points.
How many incidences are there?
This line has two points
in it, so that counts two.
And that line has one point
and that line has one point,
so that's four incidences.
You can also think of
this as the sum over all
the lines in the set of
lines of the number of points
on that line.
This is a way of measuring how
much the points and lines are
intersecting with each other.
OK.
So the general Szemeredi-Trotter
theorem says that if you have
some points and some lines, the
number of incidences between
them is bounded by the number of
points plus the number of lines
plus points to the
2/3 lines to the 2/3.
OK.
Let's look at some examples to
see where this stuff comes from.
And the examples
will also remind us
of the connection with
projection theory.
OK.
So how could we
have X incidences?
That's not too hard to do.
If you have one line and you
put all the points on it,
then the number of
incidences is around
X. How could you
have L incidences?
That's not too
hard to do either.
If you have one point and you
have all the lines passing
through it, then the
number of incidences
is around the number of lines.
OK.
Now how can you get this?
This is the most
interesting, and it's
a fundamentally trickier
example than the first.
So the third example is
one that we have discussed.
It's based on an integer grid.
So let's say X is an
N by N integer grid.
OK.
And then we're going to try
to draw some lines that each
hit many points.
And we observed in
class on the first day
that if you have a line
at a rational slope, then
it will go through many points.
So those are our lines.
So we have to make this
a little more precise.
So first I'll describe
the rational slopes.
So Q sub M is defined to
be the fractions a over b
where a and b are integers, and
the a and b have size at most M.
OK.
Now our set of lines is the
set of lines with slope in QM.
And they pass through
a point of X. OK.
This is a good day
for colored chalk.
So here is a typical line
from our set of lines.
I pick a rational slope and then
I start at any of the points,
and I draw a line at that slope.
OK.
All right.
So now let's try to
compute how many points
and how many lines and how
many incidences this has.
All right.
So the size of X is N squared.
It's easy to see.
How many different slopes
are we talking about?
Well, the number of fractions
is around M squared.
Some of those are reducible.
But it turns out that the
number of distinct fractions
is still around M squared.
So this is not trivial
but not difficult.
Maybe I'll put a little
something about it
on the homework.
So now, how many
incidences do we have?
And we can say that,
well, each point
is in a line of every
one of these slopes.
So the number of
incidences is the number
of points times
number of slopes.
So that's N squared
times M squared.
OK.
Now how many different
lines do we have?
Well, we have M
squared directions,
so we have to think
about how many lines
are in each direction.
And actually thinking
about the number
of lines in each
direction, really you
can think of it in terms
of projection theory.
So suppose S is one
of our directions.
Let's say pi sub
S, the projection
at slope S of X1 and X2
is X2 minus SX1, I guess.
The projection whose fibers
are lines of slope S.
All right.
And so the number of
lines in direction S
is exactly the size
of this projection.
OK.
And how big is the projection?
Well, so let's make
a little lemma.
So S is in QM and X is as above.
Then the size of this projection
is bounded by M times N.
So, proof.
OK.
So we have X1 and X2 are
integers between 1 and N,
and S is a over b.
So if I take pi S of the
point X1, X2, I have--
what is it?
X2 minus a over b X1, which I'll
put over a common denominator.
So it's b X2 minus a X1 over b.
And this here is an integer
of size at most, like,
M times N. M times n.
So there are at most
M times N choices
for what this could
be up to a constant.
OK.
So therefore, the
number of lines
is smaller than the
number of slopes
times M times N lines per slope.
So that's like M cubed N.
OK.
These are written
as upper bounds.
There are also
matching lower bounds,
so those upper bounds
are actually tight.
And if you do a little algebra,
you will see that the incidence
is between X and L. So at least
L to the 2/3, X to the 2/3.
Just by plugging in
that this is L, that's
the number of incidences,
and that's X. So
that's where this
thing comes from.
OK.
So the two main
ingredients, we're
checking how many
directions there that
have slope-- how many
rational numbers are there
with height up to M and how big
is each of these projections.
And you can take those
same computations
and feed it into the
projection theory setup here.
You would get theorem one.
You would get that this is a
sharp example for theorem one.
OK.
I will pause for
questions and comments.
OK.
So this example,
you can see from it
that theorem one and theorem
two are related to each other.
And theorem two is more
general because this
could be any set of lines.
Whereas in theorem one, in
the projection theory setup,
we would have a
set of directions D
and the set of lines would be
all the lines in direction D
that go through a
point of X. So that's
a somewhat specific
set of lines,
and this one is more general.
OK.
So it's not very difficult
to get from here to here,
and it's not that interesting.
So I'm going to leave it as
an exercise on the homework.
OK.
Now another question that
came up on the first day
is, are there other examples
in projection theory
besides this square grid
that also are that also are
sharp for Szemeredi-Trotter?
And there are very
few that are known.
But since we just did
this, I can tell you a bit
the other ones, and
it's conceivable
that the list I'll
show you is everything.
OK.
So what are the sharp examples
for Szemeredi-Trotter?
OK.
So we've just seen the
historically first example,
which is a square integer grid.
And that goes back to
Erdos in the '60s, I think.
There's a second example, which
is a rather small variation
on it, but we know
so few examples
that it's worth mentioning.
It is a rectangular
integer grid.
And that was done by allocation.
So instead of N by
N, just put N1 by N2
and then do a similar analysis.
OK.
Then there is a third
thing that we can do,
which is to replace the integers
by integers in some other number
field.
So for example, integers
adjoin the square root
of 2, or perhaps other numbers.
OK.
So this is in a paper by
Olivine Silier and myself,
and it's actually only
currently worked out
for some special number
fields, but I suspect
it works for any number field.
If anybody knows more about
number fields than me,
this could be a
nice little project
to work it out correctly.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: One question
about the rectangular grid.
Is there any restriction on
the aspect ratio of the grid,
like a ratio of 1 to 2?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah,
there probably is.
Yeah.
So it takes a little
writing and whatever.
You see what happens for
each one, each N1 and N2.
Yeah.
But there are sharp
examples that involve
grids that are not square.
OK.
So let me say a little more
precisely what this means here.
So we would have a set in
our ring of things of height
up to N.
So that would be the set
a1 plus square root of 2,
a2 and with the property with--
so with a1 and a2 integers
and of size up to
N. And our new QM.
Maybe QRM.
So quotients in
this ring size M.
This would be quotients of
the form a1 plus root 2 a2
over b1 plus root 2 b2, where
the ai and bi are integers
and they have norm to M.
OK.
And now we can do
the same thing.
So L is the set of
lines with slope in QRM,
and they go through a
point of X. Oh, sorry.
So X is just RN by RN.
So that's the example.
And then if you
compute a little bit,
you'll see that everything
goes in a way that's
analogous to the first example.
And I guess I erased the key
points, which was unwise.
But if you think through
the first example,
we used an integer grid.
What did we use about integers?
Basically we just
used that integers
are closed under taking
products and taking sums.
That was what we
used in our proof.
And this is a ring,
this is a ring,
so these guys are also, in a
similar way, closed under taking
products and taking sums.
So it works the same way.
Yeah.
OK.
So it's a big mystery
in the field to have
what's called an inverse
theorem for Szemeredi-Trotter.
An inverse theorem would say
that if you had a set X and L
where this was tight and
especially where this dominated,
then what could you
say about X and L?
Or as a special case,
if you had a set
X and a set of directions
D where this is tight,
what could you
say about X and D?
On the one hand,
we have a handful
of examples where they're
tight, and they're
based on a lot of
algebraic structure.
They're based on the ring of
integers in some number field.
And on the other hand,
we have very little
in the way of theorems.
That's about what we can
definitely say about X and L
if this is tight.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: From [INAUDIBLE]
quadratic number field examples,
is it important for it to be
a unique factorization domain?
Because it seems
like if that fails,
then you get kind of extra
collapsing along objections.
But I don't know if
that's a problem.
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
So the question
is, is it important
whether our ring has
unique factorization?
I don't think it's
too important.
In our proof over
the integers, I
don't think we used unique
factorization of integers.
But there are some
things we would
have to check about
each number field.
Like, we'd have to check that
how many quotients are there
in this thing of quotients.
Yeah.
So anyway, so I'll
put something about it
on the problem set as an
optional project for people
who want to explore.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: For the original
integer grid case,
we required lines that
have different slopes.
Here, do we have
some requirements
on our choice of ai, bi?
LAWRENCE GUTH: OK.
So I think the comment is
that in the original case.
I said that the a over b
should be a reduced fraction.
AUDIENCE: Yeah.
LAWRENCE GUTH: And do we
have an analog of that?
AUDIENCE: Yeah.
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
Yeah, we do.
Right.
So this is the set of all
the fractions a over b.
And if a given real number--
if a given rational number
can be represented in
two different ways,
it still only counts once in QM.
And the same thing is true here.
So the same number
here might have
more than one representation
of this flavor, which
makes it not trivial to count
the cardinality of this set.
And we do need to know the
cardinality of this set
to correctly analyze things.
I guess something like
unique factorization
could come in there.
Before, I said put it in lowest
terms, which is maybe not
quite as clear what
that means if you don't
have unique factorization.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: So say in the regime,
X is greater than L squared.
Can you see that L squared
dominates in some way
and there's no other examples
like the square root quotient?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
Yeah.
Let me say the question
back and then I'll
make sure I understand.
OK.
So if you look at
this right-hand side,
different terms will
dominate depending
upon the relative
sizes of X and L.
And there's different regimes.
So one regime is that X could
be bigger than L squared.
So you have just a ton of
points and not very many lines.
And in that situation,
this term is bigger
than that term and that term.
So in this situation,
the X dominates.
So I think the question was,
can we describe some structure
theorem in this case?
Yeah.
So I think we can.
So in that case, the
example is example one here.
And so the structure
theorem would say
that you really have to have--
well, there may not--
let me say that.
So in this regime, I don't think
there's that much structure.
So I have some
lines, not very many.
And then I have a ton of points
and I want to have x incidences.
That means I had better put
each of my points on a line.
So I put each point
wherever I like,
not off in the middle of space,
but on one of these lines.
And then I get this
many incidences.
So there's not that
much of a structure
theorem we could ask for here.
And there's not that much
of a structure theory
we could ask for
when this dominates.
But here, if that one dominates,
there are very few examples
and there could be
a structure theory.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: Sharp
example in theorem two
has to be sharp example
in the projection
version of the theorem?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
So the question is, how do
sharp examples in the two things
compare?
So if you start with a sharp
example in the projection
theorem, then you can
make a set of lines.
That's the set of
lines that go through X
and have directions in D. And
that will become a sharp example
in the general theorem.
Now, if you start with the sharp
example in the general theorem,
it may not have the
special form that
makes it relevant for
the projection theorem,
so you can't go the other way.
AUDIENCE: So you
always have to do that.
The sharp example, they
are like the rectangle
with the square grid and
the later one, all of them,
they are sharp for both cases.
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
So all the sharp
examples we mentioned
are sharp examples
for both cases.
That's right.
I guess there's one
more comment about it,
that this setup
is invariant under
projective transformations.
Projective transformations take
lines to lines and of course
take points to points.
And so if you start
with a sharp example,
maybe coming from
a grid, you can
apply a projective
transformation to it
and get a new sharp
example for this theorem.
But it won't any
longer correspond
to the projection set.
OK, so the full list
of sharp examples
for this theorem
that we know about
is the ones I just
wrote on the board, plus
you can apply projective
transformations.
Yeah.
In terms of proving an
inverse theorem, which
is a big open problem, proving
an inverse theorem for this
would be harder and more general
than proving an inverse theorem
for the projections.
The one for projections,
we don't know either,
and that would be a
good starting point.
It might be a little
more accessible.
OK.
Let's keep going.
So the goal for the
class is to describe how
to prove this theorem right.
The first estimate I'd like to
show you is a double counting
estimate for the
incidences, which
is in a similar flavor
to the double counting
estimates we've done
earlier in the class.
But let's just see how much
double counting tells us
about this problem.
All right.
So double counting.
So by double counting we will
prove the following estimate.
I'll call it lemma one.
The incidence is between X
and L are bounded by X times L
to the 1/2 plus L. All right.
So here's the proof.
OK.
So the incidences are
the sum over the lines,
and I count how many
points are on each line.
And now I'm going to
Cauchy-Schwarz that.
So it's less than that.
OK.
So what do I gain by
Cauchy-Schwarzing it?
Well, if you think about
the number of points
on this line squared, it's very
similar to counting the number
of pairs of points on the line.
And then we can
make use of the fact
that for any pair of points,
it only lies on one line.
All right.
So I'm going to
bound this by here.
OK, so it's not quite true.
Let me say something
in parentheses.
It is not quite
true that the number
of points on the line
squared is smaller
than the number of points
on the line choose two.
That would be true if the
number of points on the line
is pretty large.
But if there's only one point
on the line, then this is 1
and this is 0.
So I have to add here.
I guess I can just add one.
OK.
So now I get two terms.
So this one contributes
number of points on the line
choose two.
All I'm doing is
changing this to this,
and then I still
have my L to the 1/2.
And then if I put in one
here, this gives me the number
of lines to the 1/2 which groups
with that and I get the number
of lines.
This matches that.
OK.
So this here
represents lines that
contain at least two points,
and this represents lines
that contain only one point.
All right.
And now the key point that
that is smaller than that.
So what are we counting here?
For each line, we're considering
pairs of points on that line.
But you can also think you could
sum over all the pairs of points
and then ask how many
lines go through that pair.
And there are at most
this many pairs of points
and for each one of them,
there's only one line.
So that's the double counting.
So this here is the
number of X1, X2 and L
so that X1 and X2 are on L. And
if you count the lines first
and then add up over the
lines, you get this expression.
But if you fix X1
and X2 first, there
will only be one line
and so you get this.
All right.
And now this is that.
So that's the end of the proof.
OK.
So let's make some remarks
about this simple proof, what
double counting tells us and
what double counting doesn't
tell us.
All right.
So first, we only used that
two points determine a line.
The only fact we used is
that through two points,
there's only one line.
So that means that it works
in some more general cases.
So for instance, it works
for points and lines
over finite fields.
Because over finite
fields, it's still true
that through any two points
there's only one line.
And generality is good, but
this is a blessing and a curse
in this case, because the whole
Szemeredi-Trotter theorem is not
true over finite fields.
I'll show you an
example in a second.
And that means that this proof,
which only uses this fact,
cannot really be proving the
whole Szemeredi-Trotter theorem.
So that's remark B. So the
Szemeredi-Trotter Trotter
theorem is false over Fq2.
Here's the example.
X is the entire plane,
all the points Fq2,
and L is all of the lines.
You could take
literally all the lines,
or you could take
all of the lines y
equals mx plus b, where
m and b are in Fq.
It doesn't matter
very much which one.
OK.
So size of X is q squared.
The size of L is q squared.
And how many
incidences do we have?
Well, each line has q points.
So incidences between X and L
is q times L which is q cubed.
OK.
So this example is
sharp for lemma one.
That's equal to XL to the 1/2.
That matches that term up there.
And it's much bigger
than the right-hand side
of Szemeredi-Trotter.
Right.
OK, yeah.
So let's do a little algebra.
So we have here an X
times L to the 1/2.
In Szemeredi-Trotter, we have
an X to the 2/3, L to the 2/3.
So there are different regimes
about who dominates there.
But this thing is always
bigger than this thing,
and it's usually much bigger.
So here, X times L to
the half is q cubed.
X to the 2/3, L to the
2/3 would be q to the 8/3,
which is much less than
the number of incidences.
So the Szemeredi-Trotter bound
does not hold in this example.
OK.
So that shows something
important about
the Szemeredi-Trotter theorem,
that we cannot prove it just
by using the fact that two
points determine a line
and doing our double counting in
a very clever, complicated way.
We genuinely need another input.
And all of the proofs of
Szemeredi-Trotter theorem
use somehow the
topology of the plane.
So see all proofs of
Szemeredi-Trotter use
the topology of the
plane in some way.
And the topology
of R2 is kind of
different from the topology of
Fq2, whatever that might mean.
OK.
Cool.
So I know four
different proofs of--
I've seen four different
proofs of the Szemeredi-Trotter
theorem, and they use topology
in some different ways.
I'll show you just one.
I think it's probably the one--
the proofs are not that
different from each other.
I think this probably
is the one that
is the most convenient for
thinking about projection
theory for balls in R2.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: You're saying
Szemeredi-Trotter,
but you always mean this one
on the lower board, not the--
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
That's right.
Yeah.
So we'll prove this theorem.
It's not too hard to see
that this theorem implies
the one on the top.
Yeah.
OK.
Cool.
So the proof I'm
going to show you
is based on cutting
the plane into pieces.
And it goes back to work of
Clarkson, Guibas, Edelsbrunner,
Sharir, and Welzl.
It's not the very
first proof, but I
think it's a very nice proof.
And then it's a
slightly revised version
of that that Nets
Katz and I worked on.
OK.
So it's based on cutting
the plane into pieces.
So let me say what I mean
by that by stating a lemma.
All right.
So cell decomposition
lemma says that if X
is a finite subset of the plane
and S is a natural number,
then there's a way
to cut up the plane.
So I think of it as a cell
wall and then a bunch of cells.
So each one of these is open,
and I'll call it a cell.
And this set W is
closed and I'll call it
the wall between the cells.
So the image here is
that I have some points.
So that's X. And then I
have something like this.
That's W. And this is
01, 02, 03, and 04.
OK.
So it has some properties.
Number one.
Each line intersects
at most around S cells.
And also, the line
can intersect the wall
but in at most around S points.
OK.
And then each cell in
the cell decomposition
has at most X over
S squared points.
OK.
Now it's not very
obvious yet where
all these formulas came from.
And it's definitely not
obvious how to prove this,
but it's pretty easy to
prove this in the example
that X is approximately
like a square grid.
So let me just show you
that as a motivation
for where this might come from.
And to help digest
what the lemma says.
AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE]
LAWRENCE GUTH: Ah.
Yeah.
So, right.
So the comment is I didn't say
anything about a set of lines.
So what this means
is for every line L.
And here, this is for every line
L. Now if we had a set of lines,
all we would really need is
to have this for the lines
from our set of lines.
But in practice, it's actually
just true for every line.
OK.
All right.
So the cell decomposition
lemma, in general,
is somewhat difficult.
We'll talk about the proof.
But let me show you an
easy case that I hope
will motivate the statement.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: You want X to
not intersect the wall?
It looks like you just
put X in the wall.
LAWRENCE GUTH: It looks like we
could just put X in the wall.
Let's see here.
Yeah.
So another comment
is that X is allowed
to be a subset of the wall.
And that sounds a
little suspicious.
But we do get something from
that because every line only
hits the wall in S points.
So if x were a
subset of the wall,
then every line would
only hit X in S points,
and that would be a
useful tool for us.
Also remember that
S is a parameter.
So for each S, there's
a way of doing this.
We're going to eventually--
we'll look at our set of points
and our set of
lines, and then we'll
pick an S that's strategic.
So if S is small, this
is really quite strong.
OK.
So here's an example is that
X is roughly a square grid.
So let me make
that more precise.
Let's say X is contained
in 0 to N squared,
and X intersected with a unit
ball around any center is small.
And let's say that there are
around N squared points in X.
So what does this X look like?
We have an N by N box.
Yeah.
Let me imagine cutting it like a
checkerboard into unit squares.
And this tells me that I have
on the order of 1 point of X
in each unit square.
So this is a class of sets.
So I call this is
roughly a square grid.
OK.
So now how would we cut it up?
I cut it up like this.
I'll do N over S. So the
wall is S vertical lines
union with S horizontal lines.
OK.
So the wall cuts it
into S squared pieces,
and because my set is
distributed so evenly,
each of these pieces
has about the same size.
So that gives me
the third bullet.
And if we were to make
a line in this picture,
well, it can only cross each
of these other lines once.
So a line will intersect
the wall at most 2S times.
And to go from one
cell to another cell,
it has to cross the wall.
So only enter about 2S cells.
OK.
So the bullets are
not hard to check.
OK.
So this decomposition method
is based on the key observation
that it's actually helpful to
cut up our problem like this,
cut up our space like
this, and then count
the incidences in
each cell separately
and the incidences on the wall.
And in each of those pieces,
we can use our double counting
argument.
But when we add
it up at the end,
we may get something better
than using the double counting
argument globally.
OK.
All right.
So proof of theorem two,
assuming this lemma.
All right.
So we're given X and L,
and S is going to be TBD.
And we can apply this thing.
OK.
So let's say that Xi is
X intersected with Oi.
Then we can say
that Xi is less than
or equal to less sim
X over S squared.
That was given to us
as a bullet point.
And the sum over i
of Xi is at most X,
because these are disjoint sets.
OK.
Now let's say that Li
is the set of lines
that intersect the cell Oi.
OK.
Now these are disjoint.
Each point is only in one cell.
These are not disjoint because
a line goes through many cells.
So this blue line
belongs to Li for this i
and this i and this i, but not
for this i or this i or that i.
OK.
So if you add up over
i, the size of Li,
that is bounded by S
times the size of L,
because each line in L
belongs to at most S cells.
All right.
So now let's count
our incidences.
So there are incidences
from each cell.
And the incidences
related to the i-th cell
have points from the
i-th cell and they have
lines that enter the i-th cell.
There also are incidences
involving the wall.
So add the incidences from X
intersected with the wall and L.
OK.
Now we apply our
double counting lemma
to estimate each
of these things.
So that's less than the sum
on i Xi Li to the 1/2 plus Li.
And for the wall, well, each
line only hits the wall S times.
So we have S times
the number of lines.
OK.
Now from this point on, we just
do a little bit of algebra.
We just have an expression
involving these numbers Xi
and Li, and we know a few
inequalities about Xi and Li.
We'll just put them together.
Here, it's reasonable
to Cauchy-Schwarz
because I know information
about Xi and Li separately.
So that will disentangle this,
sum on i Xi squared to the 1/2
sum on i of Li to the 1/2.
This sum on Li, I
just read that off,
and that can be
grouped with that.
OK.
And now, what do I do
with this sum of squares?
Well, I know that each Xi
is bounded by something,
so I can pull that out.
So I'll have X over
S squared, and I'll
have left the sum of Xi.
This sum of Li,
well, it's just here.
So it's SL to the 1/2.
And I copy this.
OK.
This sum of Xi is
bounded by X. And so then
I'll do a little algebra here.
This is the important term.
I'll have an X squared
to the 1/2, so X and X.
I have an L to the 1/2.
And I'll have some powers of S.
There will be 1 over S coming
from here and an S to the
1/2 coming from there.
So altogether I have an
S to the negative 1/2.
And this I'll copy over.
OK.
Let's pause there for a
second after the algebra.
OK.
So let's take stock of
the bound that we got
and how it compares to the
double counting argument.
If you compare this to the
double counting argument,
the terms match up.
So the double counting,
we have XL to the 1/2,
and that first term gets
decreased by S to the minus 1/2
when we introduce our cutting
and then the second term of L
gets increased by a factor of S.
So if originally the
first term dominated,
then life will get better
when we do this decomposition.
And if originally
the L dominated,
then life will not get better
when we do this decomposition.
Right.
OK.
So at the end here,
we just choose
S greater than or equal to 1 to
minimize the right-hand side.
And if you do a
little bit of algebra,
you'll get out the
Szemeredi-Trotter bound.
OK.
I remember spending
some time trying
to digest why
things were getting
better when we subdivided.
And here was one
thought I had about it.
If you look at the
double counting bound,
there are these
different regimes.
So there's a regime where
the left term dominates.
And in that regime, the
double counting bound
is bigger than the truth.
And there's a regime where
the right term dominates,
and you can always have L
incidences, so that's not that--
when the right term
dominates, it's the truth.
OK.
So what are the regimes?
The right term that the L
dominates if L is bigger than X
squared.
So you have a lot
of lines compared
to the number of points,
then double counting already
gives a sharp bound.
OK.
So suppose originally that L
is not bigger than X squared.
So if I just apply double
counting out of the box,
the XL to the 1/2
would dominate,
which I'm not so happy with.
Then I try cutting
things up into cells.
I count the incidences
in each cell.
Is life any better?
Well, I have S squared cells.
So if I look-- and the points
are kind of evenly distributed.
So if I look inside one
cell, the number of points
goes down by S squared,
which is quite a lot.
How about lines?
Well, not every line
goes through this cell,
so the number of
lines also goes down.
But because each line
goes through many cells,
each line goes through S
cells, the fraction of lines
that I would expect to
go through this cell is
1 over S of all the lines.
So the number of
points goes down a lot,
and the number of lines
only goes down a little.
By doing that,
I'm tilting things
towards having a lot of
lines and few points.
And if you think about--
if you track what is the best
value of this S, what happens
is the S is best when
we cut it in such a way
that inside of each
cell, the number of lines
is the number of points squared.
And that means the
double counting
is giving the correct
bound inside of each cell.
OK.
Questions or comments?
So let's talk about how to
prove the cell decomposition
lemma which uses a
little bit of topology.
So in our cell
decomposition lemma,
we want to take our points
and cut them up in evenly
in some way.
And that is reminiscent
of a classical thing
in topology called the
ham sandwich theorem.
And the cell decomposition
lemma is like a variant
of the ham sandwich theorem.
So I will first recall
the ham sandwich theorem
and how to prove that, and
then we'll work up to this.
All right.
So our starting
point in topology
is going to be the
Borsuk-Ulam theorem.
So I'll recall that,
I'll state that,
and then we'll try
to prove everything
else from Borsuk-Ulam.
All right.
So the Borsuk-Ulam
theorem says that if you
have a function
from the N sphere
to RN, which is continuous,
and its antipodal.
So that means f
of negative theta
is negative f of theta for
every theta in the sphere.
Then the conclusion is that
0 is in the image of f,
there is some point in the
sphere that got mapped to zero.
OK.
So as a corollary
of that, we're going
to do the ham sandwich theorem.
So one version of the
ham sandwich theorem
says that if O1 up
to On contained in RN
are bounded open sets.
Then there exists a hyperplane
h that bisects them all.
So for instance, if I had two
bounded open sets in the plane,
there would be a line somewhere
that bisects both of these sets.
OK.
So proof.
So first we need to
parameterize our choice
of all the hyperplanes.
And a good way to
think about that
is that a hyperplane is
related to a linear function,
so this is a hyperplane.
I also am going to want a
hyperplane and one side of it.
I'll pay attention to
which side is which.
So this shaded region would
be the region a1, x1 plus an,
xn is bigger than b.
So one side of a hyperplane can
always be described that way.
And we have the
freedom to scale.
So let's say that theta
is a1 up to an comma b.
That could be in the N sphere
by scaling theta, which
doesn't change the hyperplane.
OK.
So those are my hyperplanes.
And now f of theta.
Here, let me say it this way.
This guy plus b is
bigger than zero.
And this thing here, I will
call L sub theta of X. OK.
So f of theta is--
f sub i of theta is the
volume of Oi intersect L theta
is bigger than zero.
That's the volume of Oi on this
side minus the volume of Oi
and L sub theta is
smaller than zero.
So fi of theta is the
volume of this part of Oi
minus the volume
of that part of Oi.
OK.
So notice that fi
of theta is zero
if and only if the hyperplane
associated to theta bisects Oi.
OK.
Also, fi is antipodal.
fi of minus theta is
negative fi of theta.
Because if I replace
theta by minus theta,
I take the minus of
all these coefficients.
Then I'm replacing L of
theta by negative L of theta.
And so that switches who--
so I have the same zero set,
the same hyperplane, but now
this one will be positive and
that one will be negative.
So I'll switch these two
things, which reverses
the sign of fi of theta.
OK.
fi is also continuous.
So if I adjust
theta, then I'll make
a small motion of this plane.
And that will change these
volumes but only continuously
because the sets are
bounded and open.
OK.
So finally I'll make f by just
putting together all these fn's.
And so f is a function
from the N sphere to RN,
and it's continuous
and it's antipodal.
So the conclusion is--
so then Borsuk-Ulam tells me
that there exists some theta
so that f of theta is zero.
And that means that h theta
bisects all these sets.
OK.
All right.
Now this by itself is not going
to be super helpful for us.
We have a set that
lives in the plane.
So the theorem says,
I can find a line
that bisects any two things.
I'm hoping to take
a complicated set
and cut it into
many even pieces.
And so a more
relevant warm up is
some way of bisecting
many sets, not just two.
OK.
So if I put more open
sets here, then there
will not be a hyperplane
that bisects all of them.
But I could be more flexible
about what cut I would allow.
So it can't be a hyperplane.
It has to be a little
bit more complicated.
And it turns out to be a
reasonable idea to consider cuts
by polynomials of some degree.
So there's a natural
generalization of this.
You could do really
any class of functions,
but for this application,
polynomials are useful.
It's called the polynomial
ham sandwich theorem.
All right.
So here's a more general
version polynomial ham sandwich.
OK.
So let's say polynomials
of degree D in RN
that is the set of polynomials--
so polynomials in N variables
over R so that the
degree is at most D.
And so this is a
vector space and it
has dimension
approximately D to the N
if the dimension N is fixed and
the degree is going to infinity.
The dimension is not
hard to figure out.
You count how many monomials
are there of degree at most D.
OK.
So the proposition says that
if capital n is strictly
less than the dimension
of this space,
then there exists a polynomial
p, the space of polynomials,
which is nonzero,
and the polynomial
bisects each of the open sets.
So let's say fi of p is
defined to be the volume of Oi
intersect p is positive
minus the volume
of Oi intersect p is negative,
and fi of p equals 0 for all i
from 1 up to n.
So that's the statement
of the proposition.
Instead of using
a hyperplane, we
use a degree D zero
set of a degree D
polynomial to bisect our sets.
And then we can
bisect many more sets.
This is exactly how many.
As D increases, we have more
degrees of freedom, bigger
dimension, and we can
bisect more things.
So at the level
of intuition, you
can think of this in terms
of degrees of freedom.
So the dimension of
this space tells us
how many degrees of freedom
we have to play with.
Each one of these
is a constraint.
And if the number of
degrees of freedom
is at least the
number of constraints,
then the theorem says we can
actually find a solution.
OK.
The proof is essentially
the same as this.
So proof.
What do I need to check?
Well, fi.
So I just need to check
that fi are continuous
and fi of negative theta
is negative fi of theta.
So why is it continuous?
I won't do a full proof, but
if you adjust the coefficients
of this polynomial a
little bit, then the
set where it's positive
changes but only a little bit.
And so this volume should
only change a little bit.
That's continuity.
And why is it antipodal?
Well, if I switch
p to negative p--
actually, yeah.
Let me put p's here.
If I switch p to
negative p, then it
interchanges these two sets.
And so it switches
the sign of fi of p.
OK.
Cool.
All right.
And now f is going
to be f1 up to fn.
Now f is a map from
where to where?
f is a map from polynomials
of degree D on RN,
take away zero to RN.
Why is that?
I was waving my
hands a little bit
when I said that
fi is continuous
and fi is not
continuous at zero.
If the polynomial is zero, then
both of these sets are empty.
So I guess by the definition,
fi of 0 would be zero.
But then if I move p a
tiny bit so it's not zero,
then these sets will appear
and they take up most of space.
So there'll be a jump
discontinuity in those sets.
So the reason we
had to do this is
that fi is only continuous
on the space of polynomials
without zero.
So if I take a
non-zero polynomial
and I change the
coefficients a little bit,
then this set will only
change a little bit.
OK.
Right.
So actually, I should say that
that's not completely trivial,
that fact.
It takes a little proving.
It's related to the fact that if
you have a non-zero polynomial,
then any of its level sets
cannot have positive volume.
If you have polynomial equals
3, that defines a hypersurface
and it cannot happen that
that hypersurface has positive
volume.
That's basically what
you need to check
that this is continuous.
OK.
So this is a space
from here to here.
And to apply Borsuk-Ulam, I need
to have a sphere for my domain.
So this sphere is
sitting in here
as long as n is strictly
less than the dimension
of this space.
This is where we
use this hypothesis.
OK.
And then Borsuk-Ulam
says that zero
is in the image of f, which
is what we're trying to prove.
OK.
Cool.
All right.
So we're getting close to
having a tool that we can
use to do this decomposition.
Now we have a little technical
issue or a little mismatch,
because what we want is
to start with a finite set
and have a cell decomposition
that kind of cuts it
into even pieces.
This proposition
is about open sets.
If we have a bunch of open
sets, we can simultaneously
cut them each in half.
So we need a version
where the open sets
are replaced by finite sets.
That's not difficult to do.
It's just a technical thing.
That's how it works.
OK.
So proposition.
If Si contained in R2
or RN, I guess is OK,
our finite sets, i
equals 1 up to N,
and N is less than the
dimension of poly D of RN,
then there exists a non-zero
polynomial poly D of RN.
What does it mean?
So in some sense, we'd like this
polynomial to bisect these sets.
But we have to say
something slightly weaker,
and I'll explain why.
So that Si intersect p
positive is less than
or equal to Si over
2 and Si intersect
p negative is less
than Si over 2.
OK.
So this set could be
a set of three points.
So it's not possible that
half of them will be positive
and half of them
will be negative.
So the best we could hope to
is that one would be positive,
one would be negative,
and one would be zero.
OK.
So proof.
For any epsilon
bigger than zero,
let's say O epsilon i is the
epsilon neighborhood of Si.
So that's an open set.
And so we can apply
proposition to that set.
Apply polynomial ham
sandwich to O epsilon i.
And we output a
polynomial p epsilon,
which is in the unit sphere
in the space of polynomials.
And it bisects.
So we know that the
volume of O epsilon i
intersect p bigger
than zero is half
of the volume of O epsilon i.
OK.
So we have this
for every epsilon.
And now we want to
take some kind of limit
as epsilon goes to zero.
And the sphere is compact.
So the sphere SN is compact.
So we have a
subsequence p epsilon.
Some subsequence of them
converges to a limit p,
which is a polynomial in SN.
OK.
And the claim is that
the p does the job.
So let's say this is
the zero set of p.
Over here p is positive, and
down here, p is negative.
And suppose a particular Si was
not split up evenly like this.
So more than half of
that on that side.
Here, let me do that.
Yeah.
There it is.
So why can't that happen?
Well, think about what p
epsilon would be doing.
So O epsilon i would
look like this.
And what would p
epsilon look like?
Well, it's a little
perturbation of p.
We have some convergence.
So that would be the
zero set of p epsilon.
Here is p epsilon is positive.
Here is p epsilon is negative.
And that violates this.
All right.
So if Si intersect p is positive
is strictly greater than 1/2
of Si, then we have O epsilon
i intersect p epsilon positive
would be strictly greater
than 1/2 of O epsilon i
contradiction.
OK.
So now let's prove the
cell decomposition lemma.
So we prove the cell
decomposition lemma
by using the polynomial by using
this proposition many times.
So we have some set
of points X. And first
we use our proposition
with N equals 1.
And so D equals 1.
So we're actually an easy
case of our proposition.
We're only bisecting
this one set of points.
So here's p1 equals 0.
So the output is a polynomial
p1 of degree D1 equals 1.
And it bisects the set.
So we have X plus is the
set of X and X where p1 of X
is positive, et cetera.
OK.
Then we use our proposition
with N equals 2,
and we get a polynomial
P2 of degree D2.
D2 would probably also
be 1, but let me just
put the general thing.
So it would be less
than our N2 to the 1/2.
OK.
P2 bisects X plus and X minus.
So here's the zero set of P2.
And it bisects each half, so now
I've divided X into quarters.
OK.
And we keep going.
So at step K I use my
proposition, and I have NK,
which is 2 to the K, and
DK, which is less than NK
to the 1/2.
So that's like 2
to the K over 2.
I'd output a polynomial
PK, and it bisects the 2
to the K minus 1 previous guys.
The 2 to the K previous guys.
I'll draw one more.
I have four pieces, and
I find a new polynomial
and I bisect all four.
OK.
So now, when do I stop?
I choose the final K. So
2 to the K is S squared,
and that means the final
DK around 2 to the K over 2
is around S. OK.
So since I bisect
at every stage,
I get X intersect Oi
smaller than X over 2
to the K, which is
like X over S squared.
So that's my third bullet.
So I'm trying to prove
each cell has only a 1
over S squared fraction
of the original points.
We have that.
And then I'm trying to think
about how the lines intersect
the cells and how the
line intersects the walls.
So these are the
different cells.
And the red stuff is the walls.
So if I draw a line here.
The line intersected
with the wall
is smaller than D1 plus
dot, dot, dot plus DK,
because how many times
does a line intersect
the zero set of a polynomial.
It's at most the degree.
OK.
So these degrees are
bounded by 2 to the k.
Over 2.
So this is a geometric series.
It's bounded by its last
term 2 to the K over 2,
which is around S. So
that's the second bullet.
And every time this line moves
from one cell to another,
it has to cross the wall.
So that also bounds
the number of cells
that the line intersects.
So that ends the proof or proof
sketch of the cell decomposition
lemma.
Any questions or comments?